Add documentation for forward proxy (#10443)
matrix-org/synapse: docs/setup/forward_proxy.md

# Using a forward proxy with Synapse

> You can use Synapse with a forward or outbound proxy. This will be neccssary
> for expamle in corporate environments behind a DMZ (demilitarized zone).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use Synapse with a forward or outbound proxy. An example of when
this is necessary is in corporate environments behind a DMZ (demilitarized zone).
```

Synapse supports routing outbound HTTP(S) requests via a proxy. Only HTTP(S)
proxy is supported, not SOCKS proxy or anything else.

## Configure

> The `http_proxy`, `https_proxy`, `no_proxy` environment variable is used to
> specify proxy settings. The environment variable is not case sensitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `http_proxy`, `https_proxy`, `no_proxy` environment variables are used to
specify proxy settings. The environment variable is not case sensitive.
```

- `http_proxy`: Proxy server to use for HTTP requests.
- `https_proxy`: Proxy server to use for HTTPS requests.

> - `no_proxy`: Comma-separated list of hosts, IP addresses, or IP ranges in CIDR
>   format which do not use a proxy and Synapse use a direct connection.

Reviewer: I find the `no_proxy` description a bit confusing, maybe the following is clearer:

```suggestion
- `no_proxy`: Comma-separated list of hosts, IP addresses, or IP ranges in CIDR
  format which should not use the proxy. Synapse will directly connect to these hosts.
```

> The proxy setting has the form: `[scheme://][<username>:<password>@]<host>[:<port>]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `http_proxy` and `https_proxy` environment variables have the form: `[scheme://][<username>:<password>@]<host>[:<port>]`
```

> - Supported scheme is `http://` and `https://`. Default scheme is `http://`.
>   It is recommended to set a scheme. The default value is for compatibility
>   reasons. If scheme is set to `https://` the connection uses TLS between
>   Synapse and proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Supported schemes are `http://` and `https://`. The default scheme is `http://`
  for compatibility reasons; it is recommended to set a scheme. If scheme is set
  to `https://` the connection uses TLS between Synapse and the proxy.
```

  **NOTE**: Synapse validates the certificates. If the certificate is not
  valid, then the connection is dropped.
- Default port if not given is `1080`.

> - Username and password is optional and will be used for authenticate against
>   proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Username and password are optional and will be used to authenticate against
  the proxy.
```

**Examples**
- HTTP_PROXY=http://USERNAME:PASSWORD@10.0.1.1:8080/
- HTTPS_PROXY=http://USERNAME:PASSWORD@proxy.example.com:8080/
- NO_PROXY=master.hostname.example.com,10.1.0.0/16,172.30.0.0/16

**NOTE**:

> Blacklisting IP addresses does not work for connections throug a proxy because
> the proxy server resolves DNS names and not Synapse. In this case you have to
> use your firewall or proxy for blacklisting IP addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Synapse does not apply the IP blacklist to connections through the proxy (since
the DNS resolution is done by the proxy). It is expected that the proxy or firewall
will apply blacklisting of IP addresses.
```

## Connection types

The proxy will be **used** for:

- push
- url previews
- phone-home stats
- recaptcha validation

> - CAS auth validation

Reviewer: Is this list from someplace we already have or did you look through the code?

This seems to match my memory, but curious if we should double check!

Author: The list is from there #6239

Reviewer: We updated this at some point, I think https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/016f085722666ac68d2e4b4f21793db399203ea9/docs/sample_config.yaml#L205-L206 is the most up-to-date information.

Author: I am not sure if I understand you.
The documentation is from Dec 2020. There was a change in Jan 2021 #9084
Does the `config.sample` needs a info for do not block if a proxy is used?

Reviewer: My point was that the comment from #6239 didn't take into account the changes made in #9084 so I think the current list is wrong. (It says that we don't use it for federation and identity servers, but we do now).

Author: This really is not trivial.
I took a look in code, now:
- proxy
https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/bf72d10dbf506f5ea486d67094b6003947d38fb7/synapse/server.py#L408
  - phone_stats_home
  - cas
  - oidc
  - ui_auth/checkers
https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/bf72d10dbf506f5ea486d67094b6003947d38fb7/synapse/server.py#L415
  - handlers/federation
    - "Checks whether public_key has been revoked"
  - httppusher
  - `class PreviewUrlResource`
- no proxy
https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/bf72d10dbf506f5ea486d67094b6003947d38fb7/synapse/server.py#L428
  - keyring
  - federation/transport/client
    - "Sends federation HTTP requests to other servers"
  - identity
  - media_repository
https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/bf72d10dbf506f5ea486d67094b6003947d38fb7/synapse/server.py#L401
  - generic_worker
  - module_api
  - replication
  - `class IdentityHandler`

Reviewer: Oh I'm being an idiot -- I was confusing the proxy with the IP blacklisting code, which of course aren't the same. 😢

Author: Ok. This may happen.
But I am confused about the blacklist.
How can Synapse blacklist when the proxies does the DNS resolution? Synapse does not know the IP.
In this PR #10129 a warning should be added. But there is a function in code like:
https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/bf72d10dbf506f5ea486d67094b6003947d38fb7/synapse/server.py#L415-L418

Reviewer: > How can Synapse blacklist when the proxies does the DNS resolution?

It doesn't, it only applies the blacklist if a proxy isn't being used, so `get_proxied_blacklisted_http_client` does the following:

* Checks if a proxy is used, if so uses it.
* Otherwise, doesn't use a proxy and applies the blacklist.

Pretty much anything that uses `get_proxied_blacklisted_http_client` or `get_proxied_http_client` uses the proxy.

Frankly we should probably change anywhere that manually creates `SimpleHttpClient` to call one of the above (that's part of fixing "make proxies work everywhere IMO).

It will **not be used** for:

- Application Services
- Identity servers
- Outbound federation
- In worker configurations

>   - connections from workers to masters
>   - connections from workers to redis

Reviewer: I think some replication-HTTP calls go to systems other than `master`?

```suggestion
  - connections between workers
  - connections from workers to Redis
```

The `http_proxy` and `https_proxy` environment variables have the form: `[scheme://][<username>:<password>@]<host>[:<port>]`
- Supported schemes are `http://` and `https://`. The default scheme is `http://`
  for compatibility reasons; it is recommended to set a scheme. If scheme is set
  to `https://` the connection uses TLS between Synapse and the proxy.

  **NOTE**: Synapse validates the certificates. If the certificate is not
  valid, then the connection is dropped.
- Default port if not given is `1080`.
- Username and password are optional and will be used to authenticate against
  the proxy.

**Examples**
- HTTP_PROXY=http://USERNAME:PASSWORD@10.0.1.1:8080/
- HTTPS_PROXY=http://USERNAME:PASSWORD@proxy.example.com:8080/
- NO_PROXY=master.hostname.example.com,10.1.0.0/16,172.30.0.0/16

**NOTE**:
Synapse does not apply the IP blacklist to connections through the proxy (since
the DNS resolution is done by the proxy). It is expected that the proxy or firewall
will apply blacklisting of IP addresses.

## Connection types

The proxy will be **used** for:

- push
- url previews
- phone-home stats
- recaptcha validation
- CAS auth validation
- OpenID Connect

> - federation (check public_key revocation)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Federation (checking public key revocation)
```

It will **not be used** for:

- Application Services
- Identity servers

> - Outbound federation

Reviewer 2: @dklimpel Is this correct? It's contrary to https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/10475#issuecomment-894292709

Reviewer 2: Never mind, saw now that this came before

- In worker configurations
  - connections between workers
  - connections from workers to Redis

> - fetch keys from other servers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fetching public keys of other servers
```

Maybe?

> - download remote media

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Downloading remote media
```
